2.4 update to the UI guide (#428)
astronomer/airflow-guides: guides/airflow-ui.md

tags: ["DAGs", "Airflow UI", "Basics", "XCom", "Tasks", "Connections"]
---

A notable feature of Apache Airflow is the [UI](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/ui.html), which provides insights into your DAGs and DAG runs. The UI is a useful tool for understanding, monitoring, and troubleshooting your pipelines.

In this guide, we'll walk through an overview of some of the most useful features and visualizations in the Airflow UI. Each section of the guide corresponds to one of the tabs at the top of the Airflow UI. If you're not already using Airflow and want to get it up and running to follow along, check out the [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/get-started) to quickly run Airflow on your local machine.

> > Note: This guide focuses on the Airflow 2 UI, which was significantly redesigned compared to previous Airflow versions. If you haven't upgraded yet, check out the [Airflow documentation on Upgrading from 1.10 to 2](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/upgrading-from-1-10/index.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: This guide focuses on the Airflow 2 UI, which was significantly redesigned compared to previous Airflow versions. If you haven't upgraded yet, check out the [Airflow documentation on upgrading from 1.10 to 2](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/upgrading-from-1-10/index.html).
```
Good memory on updating this link!

## Assumed knowledge

To get the most out of this guide, you should have knowledge of:

- What Airflow is and when to use it. See [Introduction to Apache Airflow](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/intro-to-airflow).

> - What an Airflow DAG is. See [Introduction to Airflow DAGs](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/dags/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Airflow DAGs. See [Introduction to Airflow DAGs](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/dags/).
```

## DAGs
To get the most out of this guide, you should have knowledge of:

- What Airflow is and when to use it. See [Introduction to Apache Airflow](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/intro-to-airflow).
- What an Airflow DAG is. See [Introduction to Airflow DAGs](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/dags/).

The DAGs view is the landing page when you sign in to Airflow. It shows a list of all your DAGs, the status of recent DAG Runs and tasks, the time of the last DAG Run, and basic metadata about the DAG like the owner and the schedule.
## DAGs

![DAGs View](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/airflow-ui/ui_dags.png)
The DAGs view is the landing page when you sign in to Airflow. It shows a list of all your DAGs, the status of recent DAG runs and tasks, the time of the last DAG run, and basic metadata about the DAG like the owner and the schedule.

> > Note: All screenshots in this guide were taken from an [Astronomer Certified](https://docs.astronomer.io/software/image-architecture) Airflow image. Other than the additional `Astronomer` tab and some modified colors, the UI is the same as that of OSS Airflow. 

Reviewer: Did you intend to remove this note? I think we should keep it

Reviewer: Although we should update it to "Astronomer Runtime" and a better link since certified is not our primary product anymore

Author: I removed the note because I think the only difference between the OSS UI and the Astro CLI UI is the differently colored top. But yeah some people might get confused. I added it back in :) (I think it is called "Astro runtime" currently? At least that is the term used in our docs 🤔).

Added the following back in:

> Note: All screenshots in this guide were taken from an [Astro Runtime](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/runtime-release-notes) Airflow image. Other than some modified colors, the UI is the same as that of OSS Airflow.

- **Mark Failed:** Changes the task's status to failed. This will update the metadata database and stop downstream tasks from running if that is how you have defined dependencies in your DAG. You have additional capabilities for marking past and future task instances as failed and for marking upstream or downstream tasks as failed at the same time.
- **Mark Success:** Changes the task's status to success. This will update the metadata database and allow downstream tasks to run if that is how you have defined dependencies in your DAG. You have additional capabilities for marking past and future task instances as successful and for marking upstream or downstream tasks as successful at the same time.

> ### Grid View

Reviewer: Maybe add a note in here somewhere that the grid view replaced the tree view? Since it's a pretty new update users might still be looking for the tree view (down the line we can remove the note).

> The Grid View is new as of Airflow 2.3 and shows a grid representation of the DAG's previous runs, including their duration and the outcome of all individual task instances. Each column represents a DAG run and each square is a task instance in that DAG run. Task instances are color-coded according to their status. A small play icon on a DAG run marks that a run was triggered manually and a small dataset icon shows that a run was triggered via a Dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Grid View was introduced in Airflow 2.3 and shows a grid representation of the DAG's previous runs, including their duration and the outcome of all individual task instances. Each column represents a DAG run and each square represents a task instance in that DAG run. Task instances are color-coded according to their status. A small play icon on a DAG run indicates that a run was triggered manually, and a small dataset icon shows that a run was triggered via a dataset update.
```

Maybe link to the new datasets guide on "datasets update" once we publish it.

Author: 👍 I'll add the link now, since I assume we are going to merge all 2.4 guides at the same time :)

> ![Grid View](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/airflow-ui/2_4_GridView.png)

Reviewer: This is _very_ nit-picky, so feel free to ignore if it's too much hassle, but I kind of like showing screenshots of the grid view that include other task statuses than just success. Like a couple with failures maybe. Usually to get a screenshot like that I just fake it and mark some of the TIs as failed :)

Author: Haha, my thought process was that all green is calming and pretty. 😅  But you are right. Changed it.

There are a couple of additional DAG views that we won't cover in depth here, but are still good to be aware of:

- **Task Duration:** Shows a line graph of the duration of each task over time.
- **Task Tries:** Shows a line graph of the number of tries for each task in a DAG run over time.
- **Landing Times:** Shows a line graph of the time of day each task started over time.
- **Gantt:** Shows a Gantt chart with the duration of each task for the chosen DAG run.
- **Details:** Shows details of the DAG configuration and DagModel debug information.
- **Audit Log:** Shows selected events for all DAG runs.

## Datasets

> In Airflow 2.4 [Dataset driven scheduling](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-datasets) was added and with it the Dataset tab at the top of the Airflow UI. The Dataset tab links to a page showing all Datasets that have been produced in this Airflow environment, as well as a count of producing tasks and consuming DAGs for each individual Dataset. The `Graph` button links to the DAG Dependencies view, which is also accessible through the Browse tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Dataset tab was introduced in Airflow 2.4 in support of the new [dataset driven scheduling](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-datasets) feature. The Dataset tab links to a page showing all datasets that have been produced in this Airflow environment, as well as a count of producing tasks and consuming DAGs for each individual dataset. The `Graph` button links to the DAG Dependencies view, which is also accessible through the Browse tab.
```

![Datasets](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/airflow-ui/2_4_Datasets.png)

> Clicking on any individual Dataset will open the history of all updates to this Dataset that were recorded in this Airflow environment.

Reviewer: I actually didn't realize this! Maybe we should add this screenshot to the datasets guide as well?

![Security](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/airflow-ui/2_4_SecurityTab.png)

Note that if you are running Airflow on Astronomer, the Astronomer RBAC will extend into Airflow and take precedence (i.e. there is no need for you to use Airflow RBAC in addition to Astronomer RBAC). Astronomer RBAC can be managed from the Astronomer UI, so the Security tab may be less relevant for Astronomer users.

## Browse

The Browse tab links to multiple pages that provide additional insight into and control over your DAG runs and task instances for all DAGs in one place.

![Browse](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/airflow-ui/2_4_BrowseTab.png)

The DAG runs and task instances (shown in the screenshot below) pages are the easiest way to view and manipulate these objects in aggregate. If you need to re-run tasks in multiple DAG runs, you can do so from this page by selecting all relevant tasks and clearing their status.

![Task Instance](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/airflow-ui/2_4_ListTaskInstance.png)

> The DAG Dependencies view shows a graphical representation of any [cross-DAG](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/cross-dag-dependencies) and Dataset dependencies in your Airflow environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The DAG Dependencies view shows a graphical representation of any [cross-DAG](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/cross-dag-dependencies) and dataset dependencies in your Airflow environment.
```

![DAG Dependencies](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/airflow-ui/2_4_DAGDependencies.png)

Other views in the Browse tab include:

- **Jobs:** Shows a list of all jobs that have been completed. This includes executed tasks as well as scheduler jobs.
- **Audit Logs:** Shows a list of events that have occurred in your Airflow environment that can be used for auditing purposes.
- **Task Reschedules:** Shows a list of all tasks that have been rescheduled.

> - **Triggers:** Shows any triggers that occurred in this Airflow environment. To learn more about triggers and related concepts added in Airflow 2.2 you can check out the [guide on Deferrable Operators](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/deferrable-operators/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Triggers:** Shows any triggers that occurred in this Airflow environment. To learn more about triggers and related concepts added in Airflow 2.2, you can check out the [guide on Deferrable Operators](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/deferrable-operators/).
```

- **Task Duration:** Shows a line graph of the duration of each task over time.
- **Task Tries:** Shows a line graph of the number of tries for each task in a DAG run over time.
- **Landing Times:** Shows a line graph of the time of day each task started over time.
- **Gantt:** Shows a Gantt chart with the duration of each task for the chosen DAG run.
- **Details:** Shows details of the DAG configuration and DagModel debug information.
- **Audit Log:** Shows selected events for all DAG runs.

## Datasets

The Dataset tab was introduced in Airflow 2.4 in support of the new [dataset driven scheduling](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-datasets) feature. The Dataset tab links to a page showing all datasets that have been produced in this Airflow environment, as well as a count of producing tasks and consuming DAGs for each individual dataset. The `Graph` button links to the DAG Dependencies view, which is also accessible through the Browse tab.

![Datasets](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/airflow-ui/2_4_Datasets.png)

Clicking on any individual Dataset will open the history of all updates to this Dataset that were recorded in this Airflow environment.

> ![Dataset History](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/airflow-ui/2_4_DatasetsDetails.png)

Author: Reminder comment that these screenshots might need updating before merge!
